in a sport known for pushing the body to its
absolute limit one event stands Above the Rest
a race where no amount of talent or training
can spare you from the crushing pain at the
finish a blend of technique speed and endurance
that's run right on the razor's edge of physiology
and grit but he's run himself into a gold medal
and the hospital by the looks of it but uh welcome
to the Beauty and the brutality of the 400 m 400 m
is just a single lap around the track not exactly
an intimidating distance how could it possibly
be the most difficult defendant track and field
surely there are more formidable challenges
found in the middle to longer distances right
you know the ones that require massive aerobic
capacity extended Focus race tactics but you
see the thing with those longer races is they
allow room for pacing moments to recover even a
stride or two taken less imp perfectly you might
even have time to Hype up the [Music] crowd then
there are the shorter Sprints although they
require technical Precision massive amounts
of power and leave pretty much no room for error
they're simply over too quickly these subject the
athlete to a momentary blast not a prolonged
struggle enter the 400 m technically it's a
long Sprint and practically it's a theater
of pain even at the highest level [Music]
he also hinted that his coach is trying to
persuade him to try the 400 m I'm hoping not
um I'm trying to discourage my coach from
that but I'm one of those persons I don't
really back from anything unless you're
giving me a 400 and I don't want to run
it so in any event longer than the 400 the start's
pretty unremarkable with a quick Shuffle to the
line a brief pause and off they go the start
of the 400 is vastly more challenging that's
because it involves one of the most technical
elements in the sport the block start now in
the 400 you can't win the race at the start but
you can certainly lose it so what makes block
start so difficult well first a good block start
requires precise Technique we find over hundreds
if not thousands of hours you got the body angles
the timing of force application the path of the
back foot the distance of the first step the
list goes on then there's the sheer physical
demand from a dead standstill athletes have
to launch their body forward creating immense
linear force and of course then you got the
mental component the split-second reaction to
the starters pistol and then that ever looming
threat of a false start false start L [Applause]
four it's a race that begins with
immediate pressure then things get
complicated so the Crux of the race comes down
to one of the few indisputable facts in track
and field which is no person on the planet
can run the 400 all out from start to finish
the reason why it comes down to how the body
creates energy and the way it does so during
the 400 is the most painful so here's an easy way
to think about it you have three Energy Systems
to Power movement they work on a Continuum
and there are individual differences but
no matter what when intensity is high energy
comes at a price so during the first 50 m of
the race the body uses immediate energy stored
as ATP and foser creatin think of this as your
body's version of a short sharp rocket booster
so this energy is rapid and intense but it's
very shortlived it's usually expanded within
the first 6 to 10 seconds so at the start of
the race athletes unleash it pushing from
90 to 100% of their Max right from the gun
[Music] after that initial burst Runners
transition into a phase that sustains a
high but not maximum speed so now we're on
to the second energy source called anerobic
glycolysis as this fuel's created we've got
lactate and the associated hydrogen ions
which to simplify we're just going to refer
to as lactic acid this byproduct causes the
muscles to burn and impairs function if this a
shorter Sprint like the 100 or 200 this isn't
a concern the race is over well before lactic
acid becomes a factor this is where strategy
in the 400 is Paramount if you go too fast
too soon you're going to accumulate lactic
acid well beyond what the body can handle you
can't ease off that much either so you got to
maintain a near Peak Pace without tapping
out your reserves cuz at the end of this
phase you're only halfway [Music] there this
is where the third Energy System comes into
play it's a shift from quick but limited energy
production to a more efficient process that can
support prolonged endurance but again there's
a catch aerobic energy isn't created nearly as
fast which means there's a looming energy crisis
on the horizon energy demand will soon outstrip
Supply setting the stage for an intense showdown
of physiological limits in the Final Phase of the
race this is what it all comes down to the fourth
stage is where chaos prevails especially if you
you didn't get the other phases right but
even if you did get the other phases right
the final stretch is still hell on Earth just
ask anyone who's run the race as this reditor
[Music] [Applause]
did at this point the body is on the brink
of exhausting its Anor robic energy reserves
the body attempts to fill the energy gaps
with more aerobic energy but because it's
a slower process it's struggles to match the
immediate and intense demands of the Sprint and
the rising acidity within the muscles not only
induces agonizing pain but it's also starting
to impair muscular function this is where the
true mental battle begins to unfold not one
of tactics but one of guts the final stretch
is not just a race against competitors it's a
duel between an athlete's drive to succeed and
the overwhelming desire to ease the pain this
Crucible this intense showdown of heart and
mind is what defines the essence at the 400
[Music]
m